[docs] New page: Components lifecycle (#8372)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/date-pickers/lifecycle/lifecycle.md

- if the last view has been completed, we call `onAccept` with the current value.
- if the last view has not been completed, we call `onAccept` with the last validated value

#### When a value is validated using the action bar

## Only update when the value is valid

The `onChange` callback received a 2nd parameter containing the validation error associated to the current value.
If you only want to update your state when the value is valid, you can ignore any `onChange` call with a non-null `validationError`.

In the example below, `onChange` will only be called if the date is valid and its year is 2022:

{{"demo": "LifeCycleIgnoreInvalidValue.js"}}

## Server interaction

If the selected value is used to interact with the server, you might want to avoid sending all the intermediate states.

Especially if the user is setting the date using the arrow interaction.

In such a case, the recommended UI is to add a button for validating the form.
If for some reason, you need to send the data to the server without having the user pressing a validation button, you can debouce the `onChange` as follow.

> In the following demo, `<DateField />` is extended adding an `onAccept` prop which is a debounced version of the `onChange`.

Reviewer: Follow up: https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/8627#discussion_r1169007063

```suggestion
The following demo shows how to extend the Date Field component by adding an `onAccept` prop, which is a debounced version of `onChange`.
```

---
product: date-pickers
title: Components lifecycle
githubLabel: 'component: pickers'
packageName: '@mui/x-date-pickers'
---

# Components lifecycle

<p class="description">This page explains when the callbacks onChange, onAccept and onClose are called.</p>

## Fields lifecycle

### On simple fields

:::info

> The information below are applicable on standalone fields (when rendering `<DateField />`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The information below is applicable on standalone fields (when rendering `<DateField />`),
```

Seems uncountable are also impacting conjugation 🤷
https://www.thefreedictionary.com/Uncountable-Nouns.htm#:~:text=Subject%2Dverb%20agreement&text=plural%20subjects.,singular%20forms%20of%20their%20verbs.

> The information below are applicable on standalone fields (when rendering `<DateField />`),
> but also on pickers for the field editing (when rendering `<DatePicker />` and using the input to edit the value).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The information below is applicable to standalone fields (when rendering `<DateField />`),
as well as to pickers for field editing (when rendering `<DatePicker />` and using the input to edit the value).
```

:::

The field components have an internal state to update the visible value.

It will only call the `onChange` callback when:

- the user fills one section of an empty input. The value equals `Invalid date`.
- the user completes all sections of an input. The value reflects the input.
- the user cleans one section of a completed input. The value equals `Invalid date`.

> - the user cleans all sections of an input. The value equals `null`.

Author: Could you describe more in details what you have in mind?

> In the example below, `onChange` will be called when any of the conditions are triggered:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example below, `onChange` will be called when any of the conditions from above are triggered:
```

> In the example below, `onChange` will be called when any of the conditions are triggered:

Author: How about `The example below shows the last value received by `onChange`.` ?

> In the example below, `onChange` will be called when any of the conditions are triggered:

Reviewer: even better :)

{{"demo": "LifeCycleDateFieldEmpty.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### On range fields [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan)

On range fields (`SingleInputDateRangeField` / `MultiInputDateRangeField` / ... ),
`onChange` will be called if the date you are modifying is matching one of the condition above,
even if the other date does not.

In the example below, changing the value of the start date section will call `onChange` even if the end date is empty or partially filled.

{{"demo": "LifeCycleDateRangeField.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ## Pickers lifecycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pickers lifecycle

The information below is applicable when editing the value with views.
For example with the calendar, the clock or the digital clock.
```

Author: It also covers briefly the field with the section `When the field used calls `onChange``

> ### When is `onClose` called ?

Author: I find it so ugly without a space :laughing: 
But you are right, fixed :+1:

:::info

> If you are not controlling the `open` prop, then all the scenarios below also describe when the picker closes.

Reviewer 2: > **also** describe when the picker closes 

I am not 100% sure I understand this 🤔 The title here is 'pickers lifecycle' and this section describes when `onClose` is called. Does it describe something else? Maybe the use of the word 'also' here makes the phrasing a bit confusing.

Author: Let's centralize the discussion around this `info` in https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/8372#discussion_r1229863435 :+1:

> :::info
> If you are not controlling the `open` prop, then all the scenarios below also describe when the picker closes.
> :::
> 

Reviewer: It's confusing. I mean it's expected that If I don't control the open/close behavior the `onClose` is called when closing. This info let me thought "Ok, if it's highlighted their might be a trick" But did not find it.

```suggestion

```

Author: How would you phrase it?
The information I want to cover here is that the section covers explains when the picker is closed.
But if you control the open status, then it covers when `onClose` is called.

Maybe I can rename the section `When is it closed?`

Reviewer: Just with the current title `### When is `onClose` called?` it sounds good.

It's not that much of an issue that by default when `onClose` is called, the view closes.

Author: `onClose` is called even when you are not controlling.

Reviewer 2: Did I get this right? We can split the information in smaller sentences. 🤔 

```suggestion
:::info
In all the below scenarios the picker closes by default. Additionally, `onClose` is called in these scenarios if the `open` prop is controlled.
:::
```

Author: > Additionally, `onClose` is called in these scenarios if the `open` prop is controlled.

`onClose` is called even if you are not controlling

> In all the below scenarios the picker closes by default

I think it's hard to guess what "by default" means.

How about

:::info
In all the below scenarios, the picker closes when `onClose` is called, except if you are controlling the `open` prop..
:::

> #### When the last view is completed

Reviewer 2: I love how this section is super detailed ⭐ 
I am wondering if it might be a good idea to add visuals to this? A small demo that displays a snackbar or alert of some sort with '`onClose` event triggered' 🤔

Author: Maybe we can do a follow up
I would love if we could improve the DX of [this demo](https://deploy-preview-8372--material-ui-x.netlify.app/x/react-date-pickers/lifecycle/#server-interaction) and apply it to ther places.

When the last view is completed, `onClose` will be called only if the `closeOnSelect` prop is equal to `true`.
By default, it is set to `true` on desktop and `false` on mobile.

Here are a few examples:

:::info

> The example below are using the desktop and mobile variant of the pickers, but the behavior is exactly the same when using the responsive variant (`DatePicker`, `TimePicker`, ...) on a mobile or desktop environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The examples below are using the desktop and mobile variant of the pickers, but the behavior is exactly the same when using the responsive variant (`DatePicker`, `TimePicker`, ...) on a mobile or desktop environment.
```

:::

> 

Reviewer: You are very close to creating a multiple choice questionary 🤔

```jsx
<DesktopDatePicker />
```
The picker will close:
- [ ] After selecting the day (yes, by default closeOnSelect='true' for desktop components and the last view is 'day')
- [ ] After selecting the year (no, by default the last view of date pickers is 'day')
- [ ] Only if the user presses accept or clicks outside of the view (no, by default closeOnSelect='true' for desktop components)

```jsx
<DesktopDatePicker closeOnSelect={false} />
```
The picker will close:
- [ ] After selecting the day (no, here closeOnSelect is set to false, so it will not close after value selection)
- [ ] After selecting the year (no, here closeOnSelect is set to false, so it will not close after value selection)
- [ ] Only if the user presses accept or clicks outside of the view (yes, because closeOnSelect is set to false)

Author: :laughing:

  :::warning
  If you want to set `closeOnSelect` to `false` on a desktop picker, you should probably also enable the action bar to allow the user to validate the value:

  ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker
    closeOnSelect={false}
    slotProps={{ actionBar: { actions: ['cancel', 'accept'] } }}
  />
  ```

  :::

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker views={['day', 'month', 'year']} />
  ```

  - Explicit `views` prop: `['day', 'month', 'year']`
  - Default `closeOnSelect` prop: `true`

  **Behavior:** The picker will close when selecting the year

- ```tsx
  <DesktopTimePicker />
  ```

  - Default `views` prop: `['hours', 'minutes']` (plus a `meridiem` view because the default local is in 12-hours format)
  - Default `closeOnSelect` prop: `true`

  **Behavior:** The picker will close when selecting the meridiem

:::info
You don't have to fill all the views for the picker to close automatically.
For example, on the `DatePicker`, the `year` and `month` views are not in the default workflow since they are before the opening view (`day`),
so the picker will close even if you never went to those views.
:::

#### When the picker is manually closed

> Pressing <kbd class="key">Escape</kbd> or clicking outside the picker will close the picker.

Reviewer: and the action `close` and `accept`?

Author: For me it's covered by "When a value is selected using the action bar"

"Clear" selects the empty value
"Accept" selects the current value

But maybe the wording of the action bar section should be more general.
Something like "When a button of the action bar is pressed"

#### When a value is selected using the action bar

> Clicking on any built-in button of the action bar will close the picker.

Reviewer: except today ?

Author: ```tsx
const shouldClosePicker = <TValue, TError>(
  params: PickerValueUpdaterParams<TValue, TError>,
): boolean => {
  const { action, closeOnSelect } = params;

  if (action.name === 'setValueFromAction') {
    return true;
  }
````

Nop it should close as well
Is this something you encountered?

Reviewer: Maybe a wrong memory

#### When a shortcut is picked

> Clicking on a shortcut will close the picker, except if the `changeImportance` property has been set to `"set"` instead of `"accept"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking on a shortcut will close the picker, except if the `changeImportance` property has been set to `"set"` instead of the default value `"accept"`.
```

You can find more information [on the dedicated doc section](/x/react-date-pickers/shortcuts/#behavior-when-selecting-a-shortcut)

### When is `onChange` called ?

#### When the field used calls `onChange`

When editing your value through the input(s) of your field, the picker will just re-publish the `onChange` event.
Take a look at the [dedicated section](/x/react-date-pickers/lifecycle/#fields-lifecycle) for more information.

#### When the user interacts with the view

If the component is controlled (i.e: if it has a `value` prop),
clicking on a value will call `onChange` if the value to publish is different from the current value
(e.g: clicking on the already selected day in the `day` view will not call `onChange`).

If the component is not controlled, the behavior is the same, except if no value has ever been published, in which case clicking on the current value will fire `onChange`
(e.g: clicking on the already selected day in the `day` view will call `onChange` if `onChange` has never been called before).

Some views can decide not to call `onChange` for some value modifications.

> The most common example are the mobile time views (using the [`TimeClock`](/x/react-date-pickers/time-clock/) component) where `onChange` will only be fired once when stop dragging the hands of the clock even though the UI updates on each position change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common example is the mobile time views (using the [`TimeClock`](/x/react-date-pickers/time-clock/) component).
The `onChange` is only fired once when stop dragging the hands of the clock even though the UI updates on each position change.
```

---
product: date-pickers
title: Components lifecycle
githubLabel: 'component: pickers'
packageName: '@mui/x-date-pickers'
---

# Components lifecycle

<p class="description">This page explains when the callbacks onChange, onAccept, and onClose are called.</p>

## Fields lifecycle

### On simple fields

:::info
The information below is applicable to standalone fields (when rendering `<DateField />`),
as well as to pickers for field editing (when rendering `<DatePicker />` and using the input to edit the value).
:::

The field components have an internal state to update the visible value.

It will only call the `onChange` callback when:

> - the user fills one section of an empty input. The value equals `Invalid date`.

Author: You are right, I think field would be better

- the user completes all sections of an input. The value reflects the input.
- the user cleans one section of a completed input. The value equals `Invalid date`.
- the user cleans all sections of an input. The value equals `null`.

In the example below, `onChange` will be called when any of the conditions from above are triggered:

{{"demo": "LifeCycleDateFieldEmpty.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### On range fields [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan)

On range fields (`SingleInputDateRangeField` / `MultiInputDateRangeField` / ... ),
`onChange` is called if the date you are modifying is matching one of the conditions above,
even if the other date does not.

In the example below, changing the value of the start date section will call `onChange` even if the end date is empty or partially filled.

{{"demo": "LifeCycleDateRangeField.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Pickers lifecycle

> ### When is `onClose` called?

Author: I don't think it should lengthen the main reading thread because most people will not be impacted.
But maybe we can add sections for custom usage and their impact.

:::info
If you are not controlling the `open` prop, then all the scenarios below also describe when the picker closes.
:::

#### When the last view is completed

> When the last view is completed, `onClose` will be called only if the `closeOnSelect` prop is equal to `true`.

Author: Strictly speaking, "completed" is more precise because it's a selection on the last view that is not a shallow selection.
But since this shallow selection does not even cause an "onChange" call, maybe we can just ignore it in the doc and use your proposal.

> When the last view is completed, `onClose` will be called only if the `closeOnSelect` prop is equal to `true`.

Reviewer 3: Adding a suggestion as discussed.
```suggestion
When a selection in the last view is made, `onClose` will be called only if the `closeOnSelect` prop is equal to `true`.
```

By default, it is set to `true` on desktop and `false` on mobile.

Here are a few examples:

:::info

> The example below are using the desktop and mobile variant of the pickers, but the behavior is exactly the same when using the responsive variant (`DatePicker`, `TimePicker`, ...) on a mobile or desktop environment.

Author: > Was there a specific reason for going with DesktopDatePicker instead of DatePicker?

Yes, if we use `DatePicker` in the example, then the value would depend on the device

I can say `<DatePicker /> // used on desktop` if we don't want to talk about those sub-components.

And I should probably add a mobile example as well.

:::

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker />
  ```

>   - Default `views` prop: `['year', 'month', 'day']`

Author: You are entirely right !

  - Default `closeOnSelect` prop: `true`

  **Behavior:** The picker will close when selecting the day.

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker closeOnSelect={false} />
  ```

  - Default `views` prop: `['year', 'month', 'day']`
  - Explicit `closeOnSelect` prop: `false`

  **Behavior:** The picker won't close when selecting a value.

  :::warning
  If you want to set `closeOnSelect` to `false` on a desktop picker, you should probably also enable the action bar to allow the user to validate the value:

  ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker
    closeOnSelect={false}
    slotProps={{ actionBar: { actions: ['cancel', 'accept'] } }}
  />
  ```

  :::

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker views={['day', 'month', 'year']} />
  ```

>   - Explicit `views` prop: `['day', 'month', 'year']`

Author: This specific example and the whole section ?

The main goal of this section for me was to give something concrete to the user after a lot of theoretical stuff people will probably not read.

- the current value, if the last view has been completed
- the last accepted value, if the last view has not been completed

#### When a value is selected using the action bar

If the component is controlled (i.e: if it has a `value` prop),
clicking on any built-in actions will call `onAccept` if the value to publish is different from the current value

If the component is not controlled, the behavior is the same, except for the _Clear_, _Today_ and _OK_ action that will call `onAccept` if no value has ever been published, even if the current value equals the value to publish

#### When a shortcut is picked

Clicking on a shortcut will call `onAccept`, except if the `changeImportance` property has been set to `"set"` instead of `"accept"`.
You can find more information [on the dedicated doc section](/x/react-date-pickers/shortcuts/#behavior-when-selecting-a-shortcut)

## Classic scenarios

### Date Picker

#### Controlled `DesktopDatePicker`: basic usage

```tsx
<DesktopDatePicker value={value} onChange={(newValue) => setValue(newValue)} />
```

**Action n°1:** Opening the picker

- Opens the picker on the `day` view

**Action n°2:** Clicking on a day

> - Fires `onClose` (or closes the picker)

Author: Technically speaking it always fires `onClose` even when not controlled

> - Fires `onClose` (or closes the picker)

Reviewer 3: Mhhm, yes, you are right, we can keep the existing wording for visual consistency. 👍

> - Fires `onClose` (or closes the picker)

Author: The wording around the closing behavior (calls `onClose` vs closes the picker) seems to be a recurring pain point for Alex and Nora as well
So if you have a better alternative I'm very interestred.

Maybe switching the order with something like:

```suggestion
- Closes the picker if not controlled (and fires `onChange`)
```

> - Fires `onClose` (or closes the picker)

Author: Or at least 

```suggestion
- Fires `onClose` (or closes the picker if the `open` prop is not controlled)
```

> - Fires `onClose` (or closes the picker)

Reviewer 3: I do like this last suggestion, seems the most correct. 🤔

  views={['year', 'month', 'day']}
/>
```

**Action n°1:** Opening the picker

- Opens the picker on the `day` view

**Action n°2:** Switch to the `year` view on the header

**Action n°3:** Clicking on a year

- Fires `onChange` with the selected year (keeps the month, date and time of the previous value)
- Moves to the `month` view

**Action n°4:** Clicking on a month

- Fires `onChange` with the selected month (keeps the date and time of the previous value)
- Moves to the `day` view

**Action n°4:** Clicking on a day

- Fires `onClose` (or closes the picker)
- Fires `onChange` with the selected day (keeps the time of the previous value)
- Fires `onAccept` with the value just passed to `onChange`

#### Controlled `MobileDatePicker`: basic usage

```tsx
<MobileDatePicker value={value} onChange={(newValue) => setValue(newValue)} />
```

**Action n°1:** Opening the picker

- Opens the picker on the `day` view

**Action n°2:** Clicking on a day

- Fires `onChange` with the selected day (keeps the time of the previous value)

**Action n°3:** Clicking on the _OK_ action

- Fires `onClose` (or closes the picker)
- Fires `onAccept` with the value previously passed to `onChange`

> ## Only update when the value is valid

Author: ```suggestion
## Only update for valid values
```

:angel: ?

> ## Only update when the value is valid

Reviewer 3: Sounds even better! 👍

> The `onChange` callback received a 2nd parameter containing the validation error associated to the current value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `onChange` callback receives a 2nd parameter (context object) containing the validation error associated with the current value.
```

> If you only want to update your state when the value is valid, you can ignore any `onChange` call with a non-null `validationError`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to update your state only when the value is valid, you can ignore any `onChange` call with a non-null `validationError`.
```

In the example below, `onChange` will only be called if the date is valid and its year is 2022:

{{"demo": "LifeCycleIgnoreInvalidValue.js"}}

## Server interaction

If the selected value is used to interact with the server, you might want to avoid sending all the intermediate states.

> Especially if the user is setting the date using the arrow interaction.

Reviewer 3: Only using `arrow` sounds somewhat ambiguous. 🤷 
```suggestion
Especially if the user is setting the date using the keyboard arrow interaction.
```

The `onChange` is only fired once when the dragging (touching) of the clock hands ends even though the UI updates on each position change.

#### When a value is selected using the action bar

If the component is controlled (i.e: if it has a `value` prop),
clicking on any built-in actions will call `onChange` if the value to publish is different from the current value.

If the component is not controlled, the behavior is the same, except for the _Clear_, _Today_ and _OK_ action that will call `onChange` if no value has ever been published, even if the current value equals the value to publish.

#### When a shortcut is picked

Clicking on a shortcut will call `onChange`.
You can find more information [in the dedicated doc section](/x/react-date-pickers/shortcuts/#behavior-when-selecting-a-shortcut).

### When is `onAccept` called?

#### When the last view is completed

When the last view is completed, `onAccept` will be called only if the `closeOnSelect` prop is equal to `true` and the value has been modified since the last time `onAccept` was called.
By default, `closeOnSelect`, is set to `true` on desktop and `false` on mobile.

Here are a few examples:

:::info

> The examples below are using the desktop and mobile variant of the pickers, but the behavior is exactly the same when using the responsive variant (`DatePicker`, `TimePicker`, ...) on a mobile or desktop environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The examples below are using the desktop and mobile variants of the pickers, but the behavior is exactly the same when using the responsive variant (`DatePicker`, `TimePicker`, ...) on a mobile or desktop environment.
```

:::

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker />
  ```

  - Default `views` prop: `['year', 'day']`
  - Default `closeOnSelect` prop: `true`

  **Behavior:** The picker will call `onAccept` when selecting the day.

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker closeOnSelect={false} />
  ```

  - Default `views` prop: `['year', 'day']`
  - Explicit `closeOnSelect` prop: `false`

  **Behavior:** The picker won't call `onAccept` when selecting a value.

>   :::warning

Reviewer 3: To align with the same section above.
```suggestion
  :::success
```

  <DesktopDatePicker
    closeOnSelect={false}
    slotProps={{ actionBar: { actions: ['cancel', 'accept'] } }}
  />
  ```

  :::

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker views={['day', 'month', 'year']} />
  ```

  - Explicit `views` prop: `['day', 'month', 'year']`
  - Default `closeOnSelect` prop: `true`

  **Behavior:** The picker will call `onAccept` when selecting the year.

- ```tsx
  <DesktopTimePicker />
  ```

  - Default `views` prop: `['hours', 'minutes']` (plus a `meridiem` view if the locale is in 12-hours format)
  - Default `closeOnSelect` prop: `true`

  **Behavior:** The picker will call `onAccept` when selecting the minutes or meridiem (if a 12-hour clock is used).

#### When the picker is manually closed

When the user presses <kbd class="key">Escape</kbd> or clicks outside the picker, `onAccept` is called with:

- the current value, if the last view has been completed
- the last accepted value, if the last view has not been completed

#### When a value is selected using the action bar

If the component is controlled (i.e: if it has a `value` prop),
clicking on any built-in actions will call `onAccept` if the value to publish is different from the current value.

> If the component is not controlled, the behavior is the same, except for the _Clear_, _Today_ and _OK_ action that will call `onAccept` if no value has ever been published, even if the current value equals the value to publish.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the component is not controlled, the behavior is the same, except for the _Clear_, _Today_, and _OK_ actions that will call `onAccept` if no value has ever been published, even if the current value equals the value to publish.
```

{{"demo": "LifeCycleDateRangeField.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Pickers lifecycle

### When is `onClose` called?

:::info
In all the below scenarios, the picker closes when `onClose` is called, except if you are controlling the `open` prop.
:::

#### When the last view is completed

When a selection in the last view is made, `onClose` will be called only if the `closeOnSelect` prop is equal to `true`.
By default, it is set to `true` on desktop and `false` on mobile.

Here are a few examples:

:::info
The examples below are using the desktop and mobile variants of the pickers, but the behavior is exactly the same when using the responsive variant (`DatePicker`, `TimePicker`, ...) on a mobile or desktop environment.
:::

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker />
  ```

  - Default `views` prop: `['year', 'day']`
  - Default `closeOnSelect` prop: `true`

  **Behavior:** The picker will close when selecting the day.

- ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker closeOnSelect={false} />
  ```

  - Default `views` prop: `['year', 'day']`
  - Explicit `closeOnSelect` prop: `false`

>   **Behavior:** The picker won't close when selecting the day. The user will have to click on the _OK_ action to close it.

Reviewer 3: Change only to avoid an extra line. 🙈 
```suggestion
  **Behavior:** The picker won't close when selecting a day. The user will have to click on the _OK_ action to close it.
```

  :::success
  If you want to set `closeOnSelect` to `false` on a desktop picker, you should consider enabling the action bar to allow the user to validate the value:

  ```tsx
  <DesktopDatePicker
    closeOnSelect={false}
    slotProps={{ actionBar: { actions: ['cancel', 'accept'] } }}
  />
  ```

  :::

- ```tsx
  <MobileDatePicker />
  ```

  - Default `views` prop: `['year', 'day']`
  - Default `closeOnSelect` prop: `false`

>   **Behavior:** The picker won't close when selecting the day. The user will have to click on the _OK_ action to close it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  **Behavior:** The picker won't close when selecting a day. The user will have to click on the _OK_ action to close it.
```
